# Network Tools discussion and exploration

Rather than a slide deck presentation, today we explore networking with
the help a recently deployed Debian virtual machine (VM) on the public
Internet.  We will start roughly at the beginning, by demonstrating
login using SSH, basic system tasks and then on to common network tools
such as ping, traceroute, tcpdump, and nmap.

The following is a rough roadmap, time permitting.

## Login

SSH login to the remote system.  Note that we may receive a warning
message about a "host key" being unknown.  This is an important
cryptographic check to help alert us we may be logging into an
untrusted or previously unknown system.

**Warning:** It is always best to utilize public-key authentication,
rather than just using a login name and password.

## Basic shell commands

You will likely see me traipise around the system rather quickly at
times.  I may explain some of what I'm doing, but much we may skim over
rather quickly, focusing primarily on network-specific tools and topics.
Nonetheless, here is a brief summary of some commands and system tools
you may see me use:

 * ```cd``` - change directory
 * ```ls``` - list contents of a directory
 * ```screen``` - text-based screen multiplexing
 * ```sudo``` - run the command to follow with elevated privleges
 * ```grep``` - search for text
 * ```head``` - retrieve the beginning of a file
 * ```tail``` - retrieve the end of a file
 * ```vi``` - popular unix text editor
 * ```more``` - "pager" to display/scroll a file
 * ```host``` - a simple DNS look up command
 * ```dig``` - DNS inquiry and troubleshooting tool
 * ```man``` - manual page(s) for command to follow

Note, this is just a sample.  Some of this commands may also be used
with various command line switches (e.g. -t, -lt).  

## ifconfig

To evaluate the networking interface configuration.

## netstat -arn

To examine the local host's routing table.

## arp

To examine the local host's ARP cache.

## /etc/resolv.conf

To examine the local host's DNS resolver configuration.

## netstat -tuna

To examine the local host's network listener and connection state.

## tcpdump

We will utilize tcpdump to capture a variety of network activity on our
test system.  We will save pcap files, transfer them to the instructor
PC and more carefully examine them with the GUI app Wireshark.

## ping

To test connectivity.

## traceroute

To evaluate a path from the local host to a destination.  We may look at
various switches, such as sending different types of protocol probes
(i.e. UDP, ICMP, TCP) to compare the results.

## telnet

To help test and evaluate connectivity, as well as interact with certain
services in a "more manual" way than using typical applications such as
SMTP and HTTP.

## nmap

To fingerprint and interogate a remote host.

## ssh

To securely connect and authenticate to a remote host.  We may also use
scp or sftp to secure transfer files.

## whois

To interrogate domain name or IP address records in their respective
registeries.

# Other network tools

There are some third party tools that are not installed on this system.
These may be third party web-based systems or more elaborate tools that
we cannot easily and quickly explore with our own installation.  There
are too many to list, but here is a sample of some useful ones.  Note,
be aware some tools you may stumble upon are often deficient or
problematic in one or more ways.  Many tools that purport to perform DNS
look ups for instance are notoriously imperfect or broken in some way.

## NetFlow

Network traffic summary data export from routers (typically).  We may
examine publicly available Netflow collector systems.

## Route Views

A popular system that collectors and monitors Internet routing tables
from many network routers.  We may use this to examine their view of the
Internet.

## RIPEstat

Similiar sorts of tools to Route Views, but including routing history
and other network insight.

## PeeringDB

A community resource for which networks populate their network
connection and BGP peering information.

## Team Cymru BGP ASN / IP address mapping

A popular tool used by the network and security community to quickly and
easily discern how, by who, an IP address is currently and actively
originated in BGP.

## https://bgp.he.net

A popular web-based tool that presents a variety of summary information
about the current state of BGP statistics give an IP address or ASN.

## Internet2 Looking Glass

A community resource to interrogate Internet2 network routers, examining
various routing and network state.
